# Analysis

There are several types of analyses that are particularly useful for membrane protein systems. A brief synopsis will be given here. Several parameters that may be of interest:

1. Deuterium order parameters of the acyl chains
2. Density of the membrane environment
3. Area per lipid headgroup
4. Bilayer thickness (vertical dimension)
5. Lateral diffusion of the lipids

Other analyses should be considered, such as secondary structure of the peptide, RMSD, P-N vector orientation, helix tilt, etc. Most of these analyses will require the use of specialized index groups, generated by `make_ndx`.

## 1. Deuterium Order Parameters

For deuterium order parameter analysis, you will need an index group that contains only the carbons along the lipid acyl chains. Each chain must be considered separately!

```bash
gmx make_ndx -f md_0_1.tpr -o sn1.ndx
```
At the prompt, type: `a C34`, `a C36`, `a C37`, `a C38`, ..., `a C50`, then `del 0-21`, and `q`.

What we have just done is create an index group for the sn-1 chain of DPPC by matching all the atoms in one chain of the lipid with specific atom names of carbons in the acyl chain. We then deleted all the unnecessary groups. This process should then be repeated for the sn-2 chain (carbons C15, C17-C31 to give `sn2.ndx`).

To calculate deuterium order parameters with the normal to the bilayer along the z-axis, use the GROMACS `order` module:

```bash
gmx order -s md_0_1.tpr -f md_0_1.xtc -n sn1.ndx -d z -od deuter_sn1.xvg
```

Deuterium order parameters can be helpful in verifying whether or not your membrane entered a gel phase during the simulation.

## 2. Density of the Membrane

One generally sees analysis of membrane density broken down into several different groups - lipid headgroups, acyl chains, protein, and solvent. An index group for the lipid headgroups and acyl chains of DPPC can be created by entering the following in `make_ndx`:

```bash
gmx make_ndx -f md_0_1.tpr -o density_groups.ndx
```
At the prompt:
*   `13 & a C1 | a C2 | a C3 | a N4 | ... | a O11`
*   `name 22 Headgroups`
*   `13 & a C12 | a C13 | a O14 | a C15 | a O16 | a C32 | a O33 | a C34 | a O35`
*   `name 23 Glycerol_Ester`
*   `13 & ! 22 & ! 23`
*   `name 24 Acyl_Chains`
*   `q`

Now analyze each of these groups separately using the `density` module:

```bash
gmx density -s md_0_1.tpr -f md_0_1.xtc -n density_groups.ndx -o dens_headgroups.xvg -d Z
```

## 3. Area per Lipid Headgroup and Bilayer Thickness

There is no GROMACS tool capable of calculating area per lipid headgroup in the presence of a membrane protein. We have developed a program that addresses this problem, GridMAT-MD. It calculates area per lipid headgroup, as well as bilayer thickness as a projection across the 2-D bilayer plane.

Analyzing area per lipid headgroup is a valuable parameter when verifying that your membrane did not inappropriately enter a gel phase during the simulation.

## 4. Lateral Diffusion of Lipids

GROMACS provides a module called `msd` to calculate diffusion coefficients. To execute `msd`, you will need to choose one reference atom per lipid, typically P8 of the DPPC headgroup. Make an index group for these atoms:

```bash
gmx make_ndx -f md_0_1.tpr -o p8.ndx
```
Type: `a P8`, then `q`.

Now, execute `msd`:

```bash
gmx msd -s md_0_1.tpr -f md_0_1.xtc -n p8.ndx -lateral z
```

## Summary

You have now hopefully been successful in building and simulating a simple membrane protein system. Note that 1 ns of simulation is exceptionally short for any system, especially a membrane protein. Lipid equilibration can take upwards of 50-100 ns. The timeframe used here is for instructional purposes only. 

Please be advised that the GROMOS96 53A6 force field has been shown to understabilize α-helices. This has been corrected in the more recent 54A7 parameter set. Combination of Berger lipid parameters with GROMOS96 parameter sets remains a valid approach, provided that one understands the possible problems with the protein force fields.
