# Modify the Topology

The lipid bilayer we will be simulating is DPPC (dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine), so we need parameters for it as well. But if `pdb2gmx` is designed to handle only proteins, nucleic acids, and a finite amount of cofactors, where do we get parameters for this molecule, and how do we apply them to our system?

For this tutorial, we will use a united-atom force field to describe the lipids derived by Berger, Edholm, and Jähnig ([ref](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0006-3495(97)78845-3)). These parameters can be combined with a GROMOS representation of the protein.

The so-called "Berger lipids" are somewhat of a hybrid between GROMOS atomtypes and OPLS partial charges. Since the long alkane chains are poorly represented by GROMOS bonded parameters, a Ryckaert-Bellemans dihedral potential is used, and a scaling factor of 0.125 is applied to Lennard-Jones 1-4 interactions. These lipid parameters are distributed by D. Peter Tieleman, through his [website](https://people.ucalgary.ca/~tieleman/download.html). Download the following files:
*   `dppc128.pdb` - the structure of a 128-lipid DPPC bilayer
*   `dppc.itp` - the `[moleculetype]` definition for DPPC
*   `lipid.itp` - Berger lipid parameters

So what exactly is `lipid.itp`, and how do you use it? Think of this analogy: `gromos53a6.ff/forcefield.itp` is to your protein what `lipid.itp` is to the lipids. Essentially, `lipid.itp` contains all the atom types, nonbonded parameters, and bonded parameters for a large class of lipids. That said, we cannot simply `#include "lipid.itp"` within our topology, since it is at the same level (precedence) as `forcefield.itp`.

To use the parameters in `lipid.itp`, we will have to make some changes to our pre-packaged GROMOS96 53A6 force field files (in `$GMXLIB/gromos53a6.ff`). Make a copy of this directory in your working directory called `gromos53a6_lipid.ff`:

```bash
cp -r /usr/local/gromacs/share/gromacs/top/gromos53a6.ff/ ./gromos53a6_lipid.ff
```

Next, modify `forcefield.doc` to update the description of the force field parameters:

```text
GROMOS96 53A6 force field, extended to include Berger lipid parameters
```

Now, to add the lipid parameters into the parent force field, we will need to copy and paste the entries in the `[atomtypes]`, `[nonbond_params]`, and `[pairtypes]` sections from `lipid.itp` into the corresponding headings within `ffnonbonded.itp`. You will find that the `lipid.itp` `[atomtypes]` section lacks atomic numbers (the `at.num` column), so add these in.

In the `[nonbond_params]` section, you will find the line `;; parameters for lipid-GROMOS interactions.`. Delete this line and all of the subsequent lines in this section (preserving the section that starts with `;; lipid-SPC/SPCE interactions`). Removing these lines allows the interactions between the protein and the lipids to be generated by the standard combination rules of GROMOS96 53A6. Non-bonded interactions involving atom type HW are also present; since these are all zero you can delete these lines as well, or otherwise rename HW as H.

Append the contents of the `[ dihedraltypes ]` to the corresponding section of `ffbonded.itp`. 

## Recap of changes
1. Copy `[atomtypes]` from `lipid.itp` to `ffnonbonded.itp` and add a column for atomic number.
2. Copy `[nonbond_params]` from `lipid.itp` to `ffnonbonded.itp`.
3. Remove the `;; parameters for lipid-GROMOS interactions` and all subsequent lines in the `[nonbond_params]` section in `ffnonbonded.itp`.
4. Remove all lines containing `HW` in `[nonbond_params]` or otherwise rename them to `H`.
5. Copy `[pairtypes]` from `lipid.itp` to `ffnonbonded.itp`.
6. Copy `[dihedraltypes]` from `lipid.itp` to `ffbonded.itp`.

Finally, change the `#include` statement in your `topol.top` from:

```gromacs
#include "gromos53a6.ff/forcefield.itp"
```
to:
```gromacs
#include "gromos53a6_lipid.ff/forcefield.itp"
```

Lastly, we need to include the specific parameters for our DPPC molecules. Add the line `#include "dppc.itp"` in your `topol.top`, somewhere after the position restraints section for the protein:

```gromacs
; Include Position restraint file
#ifdef POSRES
#include "posre.itp"
#endif

; Include DPPC chain topology
#include "dppc.itp"

; Include water topology
#include "gromos53a6_lipid.ff/spc.itp"
```

Placing the new `gromos53a6_lipid.ff` directory in `$GMXLIB` will allow you to use this force field system-wide.
